docs: draft enterprise SSO via Ory section DEP-139 (#37339)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/self-managed-deployments/enterprise-sso/identity-providers.md

---
title: "Configure identity providers"
description: "Wire your IdP into the Ory-based enterprise SSO stack via OIDC, SAML, or SCIM."
menu:
  main:
    parent: "enterprise-sso"
    identifier: "enterprise-sso-identity-providers"

>     weight: 40

Reviewer: `identity-providers` and `install-on-aws` both set `weight: 40` under the `enterprise-sso` parent, so their sidebar order is undefined. Bumping this to 45 slots it after AWS per the section's reading order.

```suggestion
    weight: 45
```

Author: good catch, applied. thanks!

ID populated.

{{< note >}}
**Existing assignments don't backfill on enable.** If a user was
assigned to the SAML app before SCIM was turned on, Okta doesn't
re-push them. Either unassign and reassign the user (the cleanest
trigger), or push manually via Okta admin → Directory → People → the
user → Applications → "..." → Push profile updates.
{{</ note >}}

### Step 4. (Optional) Sync groups

Group memberships also push to Polis, but currently **don't translate
to Materialize SQL role grants**. The OIDC token Polis issues to Kratos
doesn't include a group claim today, and Materialize has no setting that
maps OIDC groups to SQL role memberships.

If you want group push to land in Polis:

1. Create a group in your IdP and add users to it.
2. Open the SAML app → **Push Groups** tab → "Push Groups" → "by name"
   → search and add the group → save.

Polis will SCIM-sync the group entity. Confirm:

```bash
curl -s -H "Authorization: Api-Key $POLIS_API_KEY" \
  "https://<your-polis-hostname>/api/v1/dsync/groups?tenant=<customer-name>&product=materialize&directoryId=$DIRECTORY_ID" | jq .
```

Mapping these groups to Materialize SQL grants currently has to be done

> manually with `GRANT role_name TO "user@email"`. Tracking the

Reviewer: Small grammar nit — this reads as a fragment ("Tracking the end-to-end automation as future work."). Minor reword:

```suggestion
manually with `GRANT role_name TO "user@email"`. We track the
```

Author: applied, thanks!

`Arrays.flatten` on trial / integrator tenants, so use the legacy Group
Attribute Statements section for `groups`.
{{</ note >}}

### Step 2. Get the Polis admin API key

```bash
POLIS_API_KEY=$(kubectl get secret -n ory polis-config \
  -o jsonpath='{.data.API_KEYS}' | base64 -d)
```

### Step 3. Register the SAML connection in Polis

You can register through the Polis admin API (below) or through the Polis
admin UI, which is easier for ongoing management but requires bootstrapping
first, see
[Unlock the Polis admin UI without SMTP](/self-managed-deployments/enterprise-sso/operations/#unlock-the-polis-admin-ui-without-smtp).

If the IdP exposes a publicly-fetchable metadata URL:

```bash
curl -X POST https://<your-polis-hostname>/api/v1/sso \
  -H "Authorization: Api-Key $POLIS_API_KEY" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" \
  --data-urlencode "tenant=<customer-name>" \
  --data-urlencode "product=materialize" \
  --data-urlencode "name=<idp-name>-saml" \
  --data-urlencode "redirectUrl=https://<your-kratos-hostname>/self-service/methods/oidc/callback/polis" \
  --data-urlencode "defaultRedirectUrl=https://<your-console-hostname>" \

>   --data-urlencode "metadataUrl=https://<idp-metadata-url>"

Reviewer 2: It seems like we can get some of these names from terraform output or kubectl commands, would it be possible to just provide a wrapper to minimize some flags the user is required to provide... this could be . It would be awesome if we could put this in the self-managed terraform,  but I'm not sure how viable that is here.

next step.

Verify the connection landed:

```bash
curl -s -H "Authorization: Api-Key $POLIS_API_KEY" \
  "https://<your-polis-hostname>/api/v1/sso?tenant=<customer-name>&product=materialize" | jq .
```

### Step 4. Wire Polis into Kratos as an upstream OIDC provider

Polis acts as an OIDC provider to Kratos. Add an entry to
`upstream_oidc_providers` in tfvars, alongside any direct OIDC entries:

```hcl
upstream_oidc_providers = [
  {
    id            = "polis"
    provider      = "generic"
    client_id     = "<clientID from Step 3>"
    client_secret = "<clientSecret from Step 3>"
    issuer_url    = "https://<your-polis-hostname>"
    scope         = ["openid", "email", "profile"]
    label         = "Sign in via SAML"
  },
]
```

Run `terraform apply`. The "Sign in via SAML" button will appear on the
Kratos login screen.

### Step 5. Test the SAML login

Open the Materialize console in an incognito window. Click **Sign in via
SAML**. You'll bounce through Polis to your IdP, authenticate, and land
in the Materialize console. The federated identity is created in Kratos
on first login, and Materialize JIT-creates the SQL role from your email
claim.

## SCIM via Polis

> Adds automatic user provisioning and deactivation from your IdP to

Reviewer 2: user and group?

> Materialize. Build on top of the SAML setup above.

Reviewer 2: Builds on top of?
